Rustam's Sixth Labour: He Kills Arzhang
In the story of Rustam’s sixth labour, we find Rustam on his way to rescue
Kay Kavus and the Iranian heroes, who are being imprisoned by the demon warlord Arzhang
and thousands of other demons on a large mountain. This image portrays Rustam and Arzhang
fighting. The simplicity of the image allows viewers to focus on the fight without distraction.
Rustam and Arzhang are drawn in the centre, which causes viewers to focus immediately on
the characters and the fight. These illustration techniques establish the importance of this scene.
7.1
♪ ♪ ♪ ♪
In the upper left, we see Ulad tied to a tree, watching the fight. In
Rustam’s fifth course, Ulad tried to attack Rustam but was captured and promised to lead
Rustam to the White Demon and help free Kay Kavus. When Rustam arrives at the
base of the mountain, he ties Ulad to a tree to ensure he does not escape.
11.1
♪ ♪ ♪ ♪
In the upper right, Rustam’s Horse Rakhsh observes the fight. Rakhsh is described throughout Rustam’s
stories as being extremely strong, intelligent, brave, and loyal, and has skin ‘bright and
dappled as though flecked with petals of red roses on saffron,’ which makes Rakhsh very unique.
14.1
♪ ♪ ♪ ♪
Rustam wears his leopard head helmet and has a bow, arrows, and a shield. At the
base of the mountain, Rustam encounters hundreds of demons. The demons attempt to kill Rustam,
but he kills each of them with one strike of his sword, and the others escape to alert Arzhang.
17.1
♪ ♪ ♪ ♪
Arzhang ridicules the other demons for being afraid of a mere man. However, when
he comes face to face with Rustam he is so frightened by the powerful man that
he wants to run away, but he cannot because he is more afraid of what
the White Demon would say if he ran. Instead, Arzhang stays and fights Rustam.
21.1
♪ ♪ ♪ ♪
After a long fight, Rustam throws Arzhang’s cudgel away and cuts his leg off. Legs
and feet are considered phallic symbols in Persian art and literature. Rustam cutting off Arzhang’s
leg symbolizes emasculation and the strength and power he has over the demon. Rustam then
“grasps boldly his head and ears and neck, then lion-like tears off his head and
flings it at his troops. The demons’ hearts burst in terror at the sight of Rustam’s iron mace…”
26.1
♪ ♪ ♪ ♪
Rustam climbs to the top of the mountain, killing more demons on the way.
He discovers a well covered by a giant boulder and forty demons, which is where
Kay Kavus and the heroes are being imprisoned. Rustam kills half of the demons and
the others run away. He throws the boulder aside and descends into the well to
greet the prisoners. Kay Kavus tells Rustam that he and the others had been blinded
by the demons’ magic, and the only cure is for the blood of the White Demon’s
heart to be dropped into their eyes. Rustam descends the mountain, mounts Rakhsh,
and follows Ulad to find and kill the White Demon, which is Rustam’s seventh course.
34.1
♪ ♪ ♪ ♪